.. _tutorial:

Tutorial
========

This tutorial assumes you completed the :ref:`getting-started` part of the
document, more precisely, that the ``slipshow`` tool is installed on your
machine!

Slipshow is a compiler from a source file to a source language to a slipshow
presentation, so unlike other presentation tools, you simply write text to
describe your presentation. This makes it portable, lightweight and let you use
your favorite text editor instead of forcing you into one. It has also
drawbacks: it can be less visual than other solutions such as "power-point"
style presentations.

When you turn your source file into a presentation (you *compile* the
presentation), the file created is actually an html file: the format used to
describe websites. So, even if it is a local file, you need to open it with a
web browser with javascript enabled: most web browsers will work. An important
thing to know is that (unless special setup) the file is fully self-contained:
it can be viewed offline, and if you want to send your presentation to someone,
you just need to send them the file. It is also highly portable: it will work on
any OS with a web browser (virtually all of them!).

In this tutorial, you will create your first slipshow presentation. It is
entirely self-contained, and introduces both the usage, the syntax and the
different features of slipshow. Once you are familiar with the basics, for a
complete overview of each of these, you should refer to the reference: the
:ref:`syntax`, and :ref:`API`.

.. contents:: Outline of the tutorial
   :local:
   
..
   Writing slips should not differ too much from writing beamer presentation, when not using any of the advanced functionalities: there an delimiters for . The syntax is different, and there are 
..
   The easiest way is to include the library using a CDN, this is the option we choose to use in this tutorial for its simplicity. However, in this case you will not be able to display your slips without internet access. To use a local version, see :ref:`getting-started`.

..
   You can also install slip-js it using npm.

A minimal example
----------------

We start by considering a simple but complete example. This allows us to cover
the basic usage of the tools, the basic syntax, and the basic features of
slipshow. The next parts of the tutorial will build on this example to explain
the more advanced workflows!

To start, copy the following lines in a file, named for instance
``prime-numbers.md``:

.. code-block:: markdown

   # Prime numbers

   What is a prime number?

   {pause}

   {.definition}
   A **prime number** is an integer divisible by exactly two integers: 1, and itself.

Compiling your presentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file that we just created is the *source* for a minimal prime-numbers. In
order to get the presentation itself, we need to *compile* it, using the
``slipshow`` tool. In a terminal, issue the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

		$ slipshow prime-numbers.md

Note that if you named your file differently, you need to change the line above
to reflect that. This should create a file with the same name but a different
extension: ``prime-numbers.html``. The ``.md`` file is the one you'll use to
modify the presentation, and the one you'll share with another author of the
presentation. The ``.html`` file is the one you'll use to view or do your
presentation, or to share with someone interested in viewing the presentation.

.. note::

   The extension of the file (``.md``) is for ``markdown``. Many editors will
   open files with such extension in a special mode that will help you read and
   write it. Slipshow's syntax is an extension of markdown.

Viewing your presentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, open the file you just created with a web-browser: ``firefox``,
``chromium`` or ``chrome``, ``safari``, ``opera``, ``edge``, ... There are
several ways to do that. One is just to double-click on the file in a graphical
interface. Another is to open your web browser, and open the file from there
(often, you can use ``File > Open`` in the menu, or ``Ctrl + o`` or ``Apple +
o`` on Mac). The last one is to use the command line, since you just used it to
compile the file: just ``firefox prime-numbers.html`` in the command line.

Once the presentation is opened: you should see the familiar format for
slide-based presentations (4:3 rectangle with black borders). Click on it to be
sure you have the window focused, and hit the right arrow key (or equivalently,
the down-arrow key) to step through the presentation! Right now, it has only two
steps: the initial one, and the last one.

.. note::

   The process of compiling, opening the presentation to have a feedback on what
   it will look like can seem tedious. We will see in future parts that it can
   be improved drastically to have almost live-feedback on what you are writing!

The syntax used
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The precise syntax is explained in :ref:`syntax` in an almost readable way, but
let's focus on the syntax used in this example file.

Titles
""""""

The file starts with the following line:

.. code-block:: markdown

		# Prime numbers

As you might have guessed from the compiled presentations, this is a
title. Titles are lines that start with ``#``. The less ``#`` there are, the
more important the title is.

Paragraphs
""""""""""

Next, we have a line, separated from the rest of by empty blank lines:

.. code-block:: markdown

   What is a prime number?

This is a paragraph, in the rendered presentation. here, the paragraph is only a
simple line, but it could a long multiline paragraph. Paragraphs are always
separated from the rest by empty blank lines!

Pauses
""""""

The next line is:

.. code-block:: markdown

   {pause}

This line does not appear as is in the rendered presentation. In fact, any
content inside curly braces ``{...}`` is considered "metadata" and will be
interpreted in specific ways, but not displayed in the presentation.

The purpose of this line is to inform the slipshow engine that the presentation
should "pause" here. Indeed, when opening the presentation, only the title and
the first paragraph were shown. The rest of the presentation was shown only
after the "right" key was pressed.

Blocks
""""""

Following the ``{pause}`` keyword, we have the following content:

.. code-block:: markdown

   {.definition}
   A **prime number** is a number divisible by exactly two integers: 1, and itself.

The meaning should be clear from the rendered presentation: this is a
"definition" block. As you can see, we use the "metadata" syntax once again: the
``{.definition}`` part is not rendered, but is used to describe the content. In
this case, there is a ``.`` followed by a word: such syntax is used for add a
"class" to an element, an information which is used only for alter the rendering
of an element.

There are several classes available. To describe blocks, in addition to the
"definition" block, you can chose from ``.theorem``, ``.proof``, ``.alert``, and
``.block``.

.. note::

   Blocks support the display of a title. You can provide the title in the
   metadata: ``{.definition title="Prime numbers"}``. Try it in the example!


If your block includes multiple paragraphs or elements, just indent all those
elements using ``>``. For instance, try the following in the examples:

.. code-block:: markdown

		 {.definition}
		 > A **prime number** is a number divisible by exactly two integers: 1, and itself.
		 >
		 > We consider 1 not to be a primer number, as it is divisible only by one integer.


Emphasizing
"""""""""""

In a presentation we often want to help the viewer by emphasizing some words. In
slipshow, this is used by enclosing the emphasized words with ``**``. In the
example, we define primer numbers, and emphasize the defined terms by writing
``**prime numbers**``!


Your presentation as a papyrus
------------------------------

In the minimal example, we haven't yet touched the *core* of slipshow. But we
are close to that!

Let's expand our basic example with the fact and proof that there are infinitely
many prime numbers. This is one of the first important fact to know!

Append the following lines to the example file. (If you are dissatisfied with the
proof, feel free to improve it ðŸ™‚.)

.. code-block:: markdown


   {pause}

   {.theorem}
   There are infinitely many prime numbers.

   {pause .proof}
   > Suppose there are finitely many prime numbers.
   >
   > Let's write $p_0, p_1, \dots, p_{n-1}$ a list of all prime numbers. We define:
   >
   > ```math
   > P = \prod_{i=0}^{n-1}p_i, \quad
   > N = P + 1.
   > ```
   >
   > {pause}
   >
   > Let $p$ be a prime divisor of $N$. We claim that:
   >
   > ```math
   > \forall i, p\neq p_i
   > ```
   > {pause}
   > Indeed,
   >
   > ```math
   > p \text{ divides } N \land\ p\text{ divides } P \implies p\text{ divides } 1
   > ```
   >
   > So $p$ is a prime that is not part of the $p_i$, a contradiction. {pause}
   > **Therefore, there must exists infinitely many prime numbers.**


The modifications you made to the file are not instantly reproduced in your view
of the presentation, even if you still have the web browser opened on the
page. Indeed, you need to recompile the file!

.. code-block:: shell

   $ slipshow prime-numbers.md

And it is not even finished, you need to refresh your browser! The usual way to
do that is to click on the refresh button (a circle arrow), or hit the refresh
shortcut (usually ``ctrl + r`` or ``apple + r`` on Mac).

Refresh to see the added content, and step through the presentation: What you
see is quite disapointing. There is too many content for the space available,
and the last part of the proof overflows and is invisible. Most presentations
would solve this problem by creating a new slides, but slipshow does it very
differently, which is what makes it unique!

In this section of the tutorial, we'll see how to tackle the two problems
identified here:

- Modifying the presentation requires many steps to make it through the rendered
  version
- Overflow content is not displayed!

Watching for file changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. warning::

   This section is not available for users who have installed ``slipshow``
   through ``npm``. Such users might want to look for (great!) external
   solutions such as ``inotifywatch``, ``fswatch`` and ``node-livereload``.

Having to manually recompile the file and refresh the browser to get any
feedback is not ideal for quick correction of any mistake. There might be
discrepancies between how the presentation looks as a source code, and how it
looks in the rendered presentation. The ``slipshow`` tool provides first class
support for solution against these issue.

A useful flag is ``--watch``. Instead of compiling and stopping, the
``slipshow`` compiler won't return to the shell at the end of the compilation;
but will instead wait for any change in an input file. Whenever such change
happen, the compilation is re-run, keeping the rendered presentation always
up-to-date with the source file.

.. code-block:: shell

   $ slipshow --watch prime-numbers.md   # watch for file changes

However, event with an automatic recompilation, the web browser does not know
that the file has changed (unlike many pdf-viewer which can reload on file
changes). This means that a more complex solution has to be made in order to
auto-reload the preview on file change. This solution comes as the ``--serve``
flag, which creates a web-server serving the file, with an auto-reload script on
file changes.

.. code-block:: shell

   $ slipshow --serve prime-numbers.md   # watch for file changes
   Visit http://localhost:8080 to view your presentation, with auto-reloading on file changes.

As reminded in the message, the server listens on the 8080 port. Open your
browser on this url, and enjoy live reloading of your presentation!

Uncovering new content
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Recall the problem here. There is too much content for the space we have: the
proof of the infinity of prime numbers overflow through the bottom end!

The usual answer from traditional slideshow programs are to create a new slide
to hold the new content. But that does not come without problems. For instance,
what to put in this new slide? Obviously, we don't want to put *only* the
overflown content in the new slide: this content should be seen in some context,
that you want to have on screen.

So, one way would be to duplicate some content from the previous slide on the
second slide. This works reasonably well, but is often difficult to follow for
the viewer: it takes cognitive load to distinguish between what is new and what
is just duplicated content in a new slide.

Moreover, it is also a problem for the author: duplicated content means
duplicated work when, for instance, rewording the duplicated content.

..
   - **Create a new slide**

     When there is no space available, traditional presentations just create a new
     slide, with all free space. But what to put in this new slide? Obviously, we
     don't want to put *only* the overflown content in the new slide: this content
     should be seen in some context, that you want to have on screen.

     So, one way would be to duplicate some content from the previous slide on the
     second slide. This works reasonably well, but is often difficult to follow for
     the viewer: it takes cognitive load to distinguish between what is new and
     what is just duplicated content in a new slide.

     Moreover, it is also a problem for the author: duplicated content means
     duplicated work when, for instance, rewording the duplicated content.

..
   - **Put less content in the slide**.

     This is usually a good thing, not to try to put too much content in a
     slide. However, there are situations (specifically targetted by slipshow)
     where you don't want to compromise the content for brevity. For instance, you
     are making a complex presentation on some topics, and want all proofs to be
     self-contained.


..
   Create a file named ``myPresentation.html`` and copy-paste the minimal example.

Slipshow's solution
'''''''''''''''''''

Slipshow's solution is to, instead of clearing the whole screen and duplicating
some content, just "scroll" the window down to get more space for the new
content, hiding only what you do not need anymore!

Let's focus on our specific case here. We don't have enough space for the whole
proof, but we do not need to see the presentation title, nor the (kind of
useless) rhetorical question. However, we do want to keep the "prime number"
definition, as long as possible, and the theorem statement as well, of course.

So what we want to do is to "scroll" (I also like the idea of a papyrus being
unrolled), until the definition is at the top of the screen. We need two things for that:

1. Be able to refer to the definition,
2. Tell the slipshow engine *when* to move the screen (in our case: when we
   start displaying the proof),
3. Tell the slipshow engine *where* to move the screen (in our case: such that
   the definition is on top).

Unsuprisingly, all these information are put in the metadatas parts of slipshow
syntax: everything enclosed in ``{}``.

For the first point, slipshow uses a system of ids. An id is just a string
without space, that must be unique amongst all ids. In order to assign an id to
a block, one must adds the id prepended with a ``#`` inside the metadata of the
block. For instance, let's add the ``prime-def`` id to the definition. The
source should look like this now:

.. code-block:: markdown

   		 {.definition #prime-def}
		 A **prime number** is a number divisible by exactly two integers: 1, and itself.

For the second point, we use the ``at-unpause`` metadata kind. Such metadata
should only be grouped with a ``pause`` metadata. It says that a specific action
must be taken when stepping through this pause.

For the third point, slipshow has several commands to move the screen. In our
case, we want to put something on top of the screen, so we use ``up`` keyword.

Putting everything together, we want to add ``up-at-unpause=prime-def`` to the
pause associated to the proof. The modified source should look like this:

.. code-block:: markdown

   {.definition #prime-def}
   A **prime number** is a number divisible by exactly two integers: 1, and itself.

   [...]

   {pause .proof up-at-unpause=prime-def}
   > Suppose there are finitely many prime numbers.
   > [...]

Try the rendered version of this new source: by getting rid of anything not
useful, there is enough space in the screen to display the definition, theorem
statement and whole proof!

The source is still readable, the flow is not broken, and the presentation is
easy to follow for the viewer.

.. note::

   The main instructions to move the window are ``up`` to put some element on
   top of the screen, ``down`` to put it at the bottom, and ``center`` to center
   it.

   If no id is given, the instruction is considered to apply on the element
   itself. For instance, ``down-at-unpause`` without id is a useful command,
   that we could have used on the ``proof`` element.

.. note::

   It is not always best to remove everything that you don't need. For instance,
   in the example above, suppose that you continue by giving an example of a
   very big prime number. Technically, you could start fresh, the example does
   not *need* the proof to be on screen. However, for any viewer that is a
   little bit late, it is very good to keep at least the end of the proof
   visible, in order to let them finish their note-taking and catch up with the
   presentation.


Making your presentation live
-----------------------------

The previous sections cover most of the first phase of making a presentation:
the preparation. Slipshow has also several important features regarding the
presentation in itself!

Writing on the screen
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the design goal of slipshow is to make digital presentations "less bad"
compared to the blackboard ones.

One of the great features of boards is that you can write on them while
explaining, doodle, make arrows all over the place. To try to do something
similar, the slipshow rendering engine allows you to write on your presentation,
using the tools present on the top left of your presentation.

The best is still to use the shortcuts:

- ``w`` to write,
- ``W`` to erase,
- ``H`` to erase the highlighted parts,
- ``x`` to go back to a normal cursor,
- ``X`` to clear all annotations.

Add the following content to your presentation:

.. code-blocks::

   |1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|
   |11|12|13|14|15|16|17|18|19|20|
   |21|22|23|24|25|26|27|28|29|30|
   |31|32|33|34|35|36|37|38|39|40|
   |41|42|43|44|45|46|47|48|49|50|
   |51|52|53|54|55|56|57|58|59|60|
   |61|62|63|64|65|66|67|68|69|70|
   |71|72|73|74|75|76|77|78|79|80|
   |81|82|83|84|85|86|87|88|89|90|
   |91|92|93|94|95|96|97|98|99|100|

and explain the erasthotema schema by executing it live!

Starting animations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many concepts are much easier to understand with animations. I have always been
impressed at how scientific popularization video can make very difficult
concepts much easier to understand, and also much more fun to learn. There is no
point in not using this in our presentations!

Altough slipshow itself does not provide any support for defining animations, it
allows you to embed a video, or use any javascript library. For a scripted start
and stepping of your animation, you can use the ``exec-at-unpause`` attribute,
combined with the special ``slip-script`` codeblock!

Here is a minimal example of an erasthotema animation. It is very dably written,
in JS/CSS/HTML, so you need some basic skills on these to understand it, but you
can use libraries to make it less tedious.

.. code-block:: markdown

   {#container}

   {pause exec-at-unpause}
   ```slip-script
   let d = document.querySelector("#container");
   d.style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(10, auto)";
   for(i=1; i<=50 ; i++) {
     let e = document.createElement("div")
     e.style = "border: 1px solid black; padding: 5px ; margin: 5px";
     e.textContent = i;
     d.appendChild(e)
   }
   ```

   {pause exec-at-unpause}
   ```slip-script
   let array = document.querySelectorAll("#container > *");
   function sleep(ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, ms))
   }
   async function do_(start, w) {
     array[start - 1].style.background="green";
     await sleep(w);
     for(j = start * 2 ; j <= 50 ; j += start) {
       await sleep(125);
       array[j-1].style.background="red";
     }
   }
   slip.do_ = do_
   do_(2, 50)
   ```

   {pause exec-at-unpause}
   ```slip-script
   slip.do_(3, 100)
   ```


Using the table of content
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Press ``t`` during a presentation to open the table of content, with fast jump
to any part of your presentation!

Moving freely
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During a presentation, it is important to be not be too tied to the original
program. You can move the window freely, using the ``i``, ``j``, ``k`` and ``l``
keys. Change the "fastness" using the ``f`` key.
